Luciano: Hello and happy 2026.
In our latest episode of AWS Bites,
we covered ECS managed instances, which is a new
way to power your ECS cluster with managed EC2
capacity.
This basically means that you still use EC2
instances under the hood, but in this case,
AWS takes care of all the usual instances chores
like
picking up the base image, operative system
lifecycle, security patching, ongoing
maintenance, and you basically focus on
describing what you need, for example,
if you want a GPU, or maybe if you want
specific storage profiles, or maybe particular
networking characteristics.
And then at that point, AWS provisions the right
instance for your cluster in exchange for a
management fee.
Now, coming straight out of reInvent in Las
Vegas, which is AWS's biggest conference of the
year, AWS has taken this very idea,
managed instances, and applied it to,
drumroll, Lambda.
So the name of the announcement is Lambda
Managed Instances.
And it has been a little bit controversial.
It has sparked a lot of curiosity,
plus a fair amount of confusion, because
let's be honest, why in the world would you want
to bring EC2 instances, aka servers,
into one of the most serverless compute services
out there?
So you might be wondering, what does it really
change for Lambda?
Do you gain something that you could not do
before?
Honestly, we were as well curious as much,
excited by this announcement.
So we took Lambda MI for a proper test drive
during the holidays.
And in this episode, we're going to share our
take on it.
So we want to share what Lambda Managed
Instances enables
that default Lambda could not do before.
And there are a few spoilers I want to give
you here, just to capture your attention.
There are no more cold starts.
Kinda.
We'll talk more about that.
And a single Lambda environment can now handle
multiple requests concurrently, which is also
very interesting, and we'll cover that in
detail.
We'll also talk about how to set it up and
make the most out of it, what are the different
ways to scale the underlying EC2 capacity,
limitations and pitfalls we noticed,
and there are quite a few of them to be
aware of, the use cases, when we think this is
actually a good fit and a good idea to use
this new technology, and of course,
we'll talk about pricing and whether it's worth
the cost and the effort.
Now, since we built a realistic application for
this exercise, we'll also talk about our use
case and our example application as well.
My name is Luciano and I'm joined by Eoin and
this is AWS Bites.
AWS Bites is brought to you by fourTheorem.
Stay tuned to hear more about fourTheorem at the
end of the show.
So Eoin, maybe we should start by clarifying
again, what is the difference between default,
I guess we should call them, lambdas,
and lambda on EC2?
Eoin: Yeah, let's call the old model the default.
That's what AWS calls it in the documentation.
So let's roll with that.
Your default lambda is the fully managed,
just run my code service that we know and love
and most people refer to when they say lambda
functions.
And a function is invoked in response to an
event, right?
An object gets uploaded to S3.
That can be an event that triggers a lambda that
resizes an image, extracts metadata.
That's a canonical example.
So when an event arrives, AWS is running your
code in this isolated execution environment.
Where does this environment exist in terms of
compute?
It doesn't matter.
Of course, it will be in a server somewhere,
but we don't get to see that.
We don't care.
That's what we like.
Important detail is that each environment
processes only one event or one invocation at a
time.
If more events come in, Lambda scales out by
creating more environments to handle
concurrency.
And then if traffic scales back, Lambda will
manage scaling back the execution environments,
often effectively to zero.
The main trade-off is cold starts then,
because all of that scaling that Lambda is doing
behind the scenes, you don't pay for that,
you don't think about it.
But it means that sometimes there isn't a warm
environment ready to serve your event,
and Lambda will need to create a brand new
environment, which takes time.
Sometimes it can be a few seconds,
sometimes it's as low as 100 milliseconds or
even less if you're using Rust, for example.
But often it can be significant and we've talked
about that in previous episodes when we dealt
with Python and large data science packages.
Now, let's talk about the new way of doing
things, the new option at least, Lambda Managed
Instances.
This one
is about the Lambda service, keeping the same
programming model and integrations,
but it changes the how and where your code runs
element.
Now your function executes in containers on EC2
instances in your account.
These EC2 instances are chosen via something
called a capacity provider.
And we'll talk about more about that in a
second.
So the AWS is still managing provisioning,
patching, routing, load balancing,
the scaling mechanics and the lifecycle,
that's important.
So it's not about necessarily taking on all the
burden of managing EC2 instances.
It is about just changing the scaling and
provisioning capacity and also the cost model
for Lambda, which we'll also talk about.
So it's not just Lambda, but on different
hardware, there are a few big behavioral changes
that will materially affect how your functions
perform, how they scale, and how you need to
write and operate them.
So it's definitely something you need to go into
with your mind fully informed on how all these
things work.
So what changes in practice is, well,
for one, the concurrency model.
One execution environment can now handle
multiple concurrent invocations, unlike default
Lambda's single invocation per environment
model.
This is a big change in how Lambda operates and
something that people have been asking about for
a long time.
And it reminds us a little bit of Vercel's fluid
compute.
It also makes Lambda suitable as a backend for
high throughput APIs.
We've seen people who are familiar with,
say, the Node.js ecosystem and how it can handle
high concurrency, asynchronous IO in one
process.
This is one of the great benefits of Node.js
when it came out originally.
And then when you move to Lambda,
you're wondering, well, I'm losing all of that
power now because it can only do one event in
a process.
But now you can do multiple events per process,
so you get a little bit more of that benefit
back.
Other things that have changed with managed
instances, now we now have always-on
environments, so environments can stay
continuously active
no freezing between invocations, and this helps
to mitigate most of the traditional cold starts.
Scaling behavior now is asynchronous and driven
by things like CPU utilization.
It doesn't scale to zero because it maintains a
configured minimum capacity, and fast traffic
ramps can outpace scaling briefly,
so you'll need to think about that.
And then when you publish a function to run on
managed instances, Lambda by default is going to
launch three instances, three EC2 instances in
your account by default for resiliency.
It's good practice, and it'll bring those
environments up before making the version
active.
Now, there are ways which we might touch on a
little bit later on how to avoid there being
three instances all the time, but that's just
generally a good practice.
When we talk about life cycle as well,
the instance life cycle, these instances will
stay up for a maximum of 14 days.
That's what Lambda is saying, but then they're
gonna rotate them.
So that's something you should plan for if it's
important.
And now with this model, you can pick instance
characteristics.
So you can think about the latest CPUs you want,
like Graviton4 you can get here now,
configurable memory to CPU ratios.
If you want high bandwidth networking,
which is something you didn't have that much
control over before, now you have that option.
So these are all new considerations.
What stays the same?
It's still Lambda in how you build and integrate
it.
You should treat your code more like a
concurrent long-lived service process because
the execution environment can handle parallel
invocations and sticks around.
So if you're used to functions that didn't hang
around, sandboxes that didn't hang around,
these short-lived execution environments,
you may not have noticed your memory leaks
before.
Now with these 14-day instances, it might be
something you'll have to think about.
Luciano: Should we talk now about how scaling works?
I think a little bit more in detail.
What do you think?
OK, I'll try to cover up for that.
So I guess the first mental model shift is that
Lambda manages and scales proactively,
as you explained, and not on demand,
which is the case for the default Lambda.
And with default Lambda, let's repeat that just
for clarity.
When an invocation arrives, Lambda looks for a
free execution environment.
And if there is none available, it creates a new
one on demand.
And this is where you can see that famous or
infamous cold start.
With managed instances, Lambda does not scale
because an invocation arrived.
It scales asynchronously, basically upfront,
watching things like CPU utilization and
multi-concurrency saturation.
And it's basically trying to determine how busy
is the environment and do I need to effectively
provide more room for executing Lambdas.
And we'll talk about what that actually means in
practice in a bit more detail in a few minutes.
But just think about these two differences.
In the case of default lambda, you basically
don't have to think about anything.
You just know that when event arrives,
if there are no environments, they will be
created on demand.
With lambda MI, basically those environments are
created basically in the background,
upfront, before your code is executed.
And one analogy that I think can somewhat
explain this idea a little bit better is we can
think about managing a restaurant.
And you can imagine that if you have,
of course you need to have tables in a
restaurant and you can imagine that those are
your EC2 instances.
Then you need to have execution environments and
we can compare those to your staff working and
serving those tables.
And then max concurrency is basically the idea
of how many guests can a single server handle at
once.
And if we use this analogy, which is a little
bit of a stretch, but I think it's still useful
to get the mental model right, we can think
about scaling in these terms.
So when demand goes up, what LambdaMI can do is
basically scale two different layers.
It can either add more execution environments on
existing instances.
So this is like if you are hiring more staff
in the same exact restaurant, the same space
available, you just have more staff available to
do more things.
And then if your instances are running out,
you can add more managed instances.
So basically, you're adding more EC2 capacity
under the hood with your capacity provider.
And this is basically like adding more tables to
the restaurant, which, of course, you have to
think that as not necessarily cramming more
tables in the same space, but probably taking
more space.
Maybe you're putting the tables outside,
or maybe you are expanding the restaurant
somehow, maybe taking the next building or
something like that.
So these are kind of the two dimensions that are
used for increasing your capacity for running
more Lambda code.
And this is why scaling can feel a little bit
different with this new way of running Lambda
code.
And also because this scaling is asynchronous,
it's basically trying to scale upfront.
But sometimes if you have lots of demand
happening very quickly, what happens is that you
might not have that capacity available when you
need it.
So you might actually see throttles.
So you try to execute Lambda code,
there is no capacity available, your Lambda
execution might effectively be throttled.
So there are some default mechanisms that AWS
put in place, where basically, if your capacity
doesn't double within five minutes,
you should be okay.
But I think if you go over that,
so if your traffic doubles very quickly,
then maybe it's where you start to see
throttles.
You need to play around with that to see exactly
how it works, but this is what we can infer
from the documentation.
So again, just to remark the main change is that
instead of thinking about the first request is
going to be slower, which is the case of a
cold start, the failure mode is more like maybe
you have a sudden spike and you might see
throttles.
But in general, if you have predictable traffic
and your capacity is enough, you are not going
to see cold starts or throttles.
So that gives
gives you a little bit of a more predictable and
always available environment to run on,
which is nice, especially if you're using
languages that tend to have a quite long cold
start, like Java, Python, or Node.js sometimes,
or maybe if you have lots of dependencies that
might take a long time to just keep the
environment up for the first time.
This can be actually a nice use case where you
effectively can eliminate that problem.
Now, if we want to deep dive even a little
bit more, I think there are a few moving pieces
that we also need to mention.
And these are the router, and scalar,
and a Lambda agent.
This is more to explain how AWS implemented all
these things under the hood.
So in practice, when you publish a new version
with a capacity provider, Lambda launches and
manages instances in your account,
or multiple instances, of course, if we consider
that they will be available in different
availability zones.
And as we said, by default, there are three
instances for resiliency in different ADs.
And this version will eventually become active.
So effectively, you publish a new Lambda,
the instances are created in different
availability zones, that Lambda is now
considered active.
When an invocation comes in,
your environment is going to start to consume
CPU and memory.
And that's where you have a Lambda agent,
which is running within the EC2 instances and
reporting this consumption to what AWS calls the
scalar.
And the scalar is effectively the component that
decides, do we need to add more environments or
more instances?
So it's this continuous conversation between all
these different moving parts to try to
determine, are we using enough capacity?
Do we need more?
Is there still space to run more Lambda
functions?
The router instead is what is responsible for,
whenever an invocation comes in, deciding which
Lambda in which EC2 instance, effectively,
which environment of the Lambda is responsible
for handling that particular invocation.
Again, when the traffic goes down,
that's another thing we need to consider.
The agent reports that too, and the whole system
can decide to scale down environments and
instances accordingly.
So I think that gives you the general idea of
how things work more at an abstract level.
When we talked about the restaurant analogy,
we also spoke a little bit more in the actual
implementation details with other different
components.
But what probably matters the most is what can
you control as a developer, building your
applications with this new mode in mind?
What kind of tweaks and toggles can you touch?
Eoin: Well, at the functional level, you can pick how
big your execution environment is.
That's in terms of vCPUs and memory.
The smallest supported size is two gigabytes and
one vCPU.
The key is to choose a size that supports your
intended multi-concurrency because each
environment is meant to handle multiple
invocations.
The other big thing here is that previously you
had a 10 gigabyte memory limit for default
Lambda mode.
Now you can have 32 gigabytes available to a
Lambda invocation, which is a big change.
The rule of thumb, I think, if you're doing CPU
heavy work with not that much IO,
you typically want more vCPUs rather than just
cranking concurrency.
And then you can specify the maximum concurrency
per environment.
So default in Lambda, that would be a one-to-one
ratio, but here you can have up to 64 concurrent
invocations per vCPU.
So you can increase it if each invocation is
light on CPU and maybe more IO bound,
then you get more throughput per environment and
you'll get more cost as well.
And you can decrease it if you're memory heavy
and CPU light.
Then that's at the function level and then at
the capacity provider level, you can specify
your target resource utilization.
So how much headroom do you want really?
A higher target would be higher utilization,
potentially lower cost, but less headroom.
Then a lower target you could use if you want
more spare capacity for bursts, but you'll pay
for more idle compute.
And then you can specify your instance types.
So you can constrain instance types,
but AWS recommends letting Lambda choose for
best availability.
So don't be too restrictive and specific on what
instance types you support.
So when it comes to the two scaling modes,
manual versus automatic scaling, at the capacity
provider level, you can specify which one you
want.
Auto is the default.
Manual exists when you want precise control over
the scaling threshold.
Now, from what we've seen, that's basically just
the CPU scaling threshold, CPU utilization
scaling threshold.
I haven't seen any ways yet, I haven't really
tried it either, but of using other maybe custom
metrics or other metrics to scale like you could
with an auto-scaling group.
Then separately at the function level,
you can specify the minimum and maximum
execution environments.
So this is a particularly important one,
because you need to, if you want your function
to be invocable, you have to specify a non-zero
minimum.
then AWS might add more as it sees fit.
But if you set it to zero,
as we'll discuss later, that's basically turning
off your function, making it not invocable.
But you can change the scaling characteristics
with a put function scaling config API.
And that'll allow you to have like more brute
force or manual control over scaling before a
batch of background processing if you wanted to
do some large scale processing during the night,
for example.
So given that, I hope that made some sense.
Luciano, do you want to talk through what we
built?
Luciano: Yes, we like to do practical test drives.
And so we needed to find an excuse and think
what can we actually build that maybe makes a
little bit of sense when comes into the context
of LambdaMI and its particular characteristics.
So what we thought is, again, video processing,
which seems to come up a lot in our examples,
maybe because we think about
this podcast and how to optimize the production
of the podcast itself.
And to be fair, this is not like a full
implementation.
We didn't really implement like, I don't know,
wiring FFMPEG or ML vision models or,
I don't know, subtitles type of things.
It's more the idea that the processing is
simulated, but we build everything around it.
So in the computation bit, you could plug in
whatever logic you like.
So if you want to use this,
what we built for instance to, I don't know,
extract the audio from a video or convert the
video or whatever else you want to do that you
can do with FMPEG or something else,
you can definitely do it.
So the idea is that we built a service with
three main components.
So there is a REST API that allows you to
manage videos.
So effectively, it's like a crude API where you
can create a video entry, you can list them,
you can get the details.
And most importantly, you can trigger
processing.
And we'll see how that works in a second.
So one detail that might be important to know is
that we built a little bit of a LambdaLit.
So effectively, it's one Lambda that can respond
to all the routes, and it's behind an HTTP API
gateway.
So then we have a simulated video processor.
So whenever you call the process Lambda,
sorry, the process API endpoint that we
mentioned before, effectively you want to
trigger the processing of a video.
So that happens in this other component,
which is a simulated video processor,
that effectively is where you would put all the
heavy lifting.
Like, as we say, different use cases might come
to mind, thumbnail generation, transcoding,
content analysis, subtitle generation,
I don't know, chapter generation, whatever you
think it makes sense.
So in a real system, this is generally something
that would be CPU-intensive work, so
particularly sensible for this use case,
where you might spin up a lot of EC2 capacity
just to be able to do that at scale.
And then you still have the convenience of
Lambda to package your code in a way that gives
you a nice developer experience.
And then finally, we have a step function,
which may be a little bit unexpected.
We'll explain why we did that.
But the idea is that with this step function,
we can orchestrate everything.
And the idea is that we don't want to have,
so we actually want to have capacity always
available for the rest of the AI.
But for the processor component, we only want to
have capacity on demand while still having the
convenience of lambda MI.
So the idea is that we, I don't know if
this is actually a little bit of a hack.
It feels a little bit like that.
But the idea is that we keep the capacity for
the processor
to 0, which means that by default effectively
that lambda is deactivated.
But then anytime somebody is calling the process
endpoint, we actually use the step function to
spin up more capacity.
So we basically change at runtime the capacity
definition to actually go from 0 to a different
range that, of course, you can configure to
whatever makes sense to you, but of course 1 to
whatever you like.
So at that point, we can start to see the
instances appearing.
And the step function monitors to the point that
there is enough capacity to start doing the
processing and effectively run our code.
So it is a little bit of a hack to
effectively get that scale to zero,
which, of course, only makes sense if you
control the event that triggers, in this case,
the processing.
It wouldn't make too much sense, for example,
in a REST API.
So this is how we tested the two different
scenarios.
One where we have some kind of manual control of
the capacity, and the other one where we are
just letting the service manage all of that.
And the way that we do that scaling up
mechanism, or effectively changing,
controlling the details of the scaling
configuration of the processor function,
is that there is an API called put function
scaling config.
And that's where you can define the minimum and
the maximum capacity.
If you set the minimum to zero,
you are basically saying,
this environment is disabled.
And when you set it to more like one or
whatever you like, then effectively you are
creating the EC2 instances.
You are letting the capacity provider create the
EC2 instances and then that's where your Lambda
function becomes active and then you can invoke
it.
Other small details that might be relevant,
we use CDK with TypeScript, and if you use the
latest versions, everything we just mentioned is
supported out of the box, so there are no weird
hacks that
Eoin: we
Luciano: could see.
We use Node.js and Node.js 24 on ARM64.
We store metadata in DynamoDB, so all pretty
standard, I would say.
All this code is available on GitHub,
so publicly available.
You'll find the link in the show notes,
so feel free to check it out.
let us know if you like it or even feel
free to submit a PR if there is something else
that you find doesn't work or maybe you want to
change and improve.
So, based on all of that, what are our
impressions or maybe limitations or pitfalls
that we discovered?
Eoin: Well, given that we just did the ECS Managed
Instances review in our last episode,
Selecting instances here with Lambda MI is a bit
more limited, because in ECS MI, you have more
of a query system where you specify
characteristics of your instance requirements,
and AWS will pick the right instance type for
that, which kind of abstracts you from having to
think about specific instance types.
And if new instance types become available,
they'll automatically get included in the
potential query results.
But with LambdaMI, you can only specify a very
limited set of parameters, usually maximum VCPU
count, and the instance type filter,
which is basically allowed instance types or
excluded instance types.
So an inclusion list and an exclusion list.
And
you still have to think about actual instance
types.
So it's strange they didn't follow the same
model.
Region availability is limited for now.
If your workload is multi-region or you want to
use specific regions, right now we've got,
what, US East 1, US East 2,
US West 2, AP North East 1,
and EU West 1, so just five regions.
In terms of runtime, the support is for the
latest version only.
Some people, especially enterprises,
rely on the ability to pin specific versions of
managed runtimes
So if you're migrating existing functions,
anything on older runtimes will not qualify.
You have to use the latest supported one,
anything that's.
on the deprecated list or previous list is not
possible.
VPC networking is now mandatory.
Of course it is, because you know you have to
run EC2 instances.
EC2 instances, there's no exceptions.
They always need a VPC.
So if you put them in a private subnet with
no egress, you're going to have an issue.
You'd have to make sure your VPC has
reachability through VPC endpoints to AWS
services your Lambda function might need.
Think about S3, DynamoDB.
SSM.
So you'll need either a network gateway,
NAT gateway, internet gateway, or a VPC
endpoint.
This is exactly the same concern when you have a
normal Lambda function in a VPC, but you just
don't have an option to avoid VPCs now.
Deployments with Lambda-MI can be noticeably
slower.
The first publish on a new capacity provider has
to launch managed instances and bring up
execution environments before the version
becomes active.
AWS explicitly says that this can take several
minutes, and we've encountered examples of
around eight minutes for end-to-end deployment.
And then there's a minimum size jump.
You don't have the option of small utility
Lambda functions with 128 megabytes of RAM
anymore.
With managed instances, the smallest one is two
gigabytes with one vCPU.
So it could be a surprise if you're just trying
it out and trying to keep things minimal in
terms of resources and costs.
Also important to know that creating a capacity
provider with manual scaling still spins up
baseline capacity.
We saw in our cases when we were doing testing,
even when we created a capacity provider without
attaching any functions to it,
AWS was starting two instances.
It's worth knowing if you expect it to be zero
until you attach the function.
We also had cases where after scaling down,
instances remained active for arbitrary lengths
of time.
It's definitely something to keep an eye on.
Anything else to add to that, Luciano?
Luciano: Yeah, I think it's worth remarking that scale to
zero is possible, but it is complex,
so to speak.
Like we have an example in our repo and people
can check out the way we achieve it.
But I don't think it's like a general purpose
way that you can use it for any use case.
In our use case, it makes sense just because we
have a very clear execution path
that determines when we need that compute
capacity available.
And we effectively get it almost like a cold
start in our example, just homemade,
if you want to call it like that,
using EC2 instance to underdo it and by changing
the min-max execution environment on the fly.
But I don't think, yeah, as I said,
that's something you can use, for instance,
for an API that wouldn't work, right?
So you just need to be aware that while it
is possible, it is complex, and it's not
something you can use as a general purpose
mechanism.
And the main reason is because when you set the
mean execution environment to zero,
effectively, your lambda function becomes
deactivated.
And there is a very clear indication when you go
in the web UI on that particular lambda
function, you will see a blue banner saying,
this version is deactivated.
To activate it, you need to set the scaling to
a value that is non-zero.
So just be aware of that.
If you were expecting automatic scale to zero,
that's not necessarily the case.
The other thing is that because now you get
concurrent execution, that comes with a few more
headaches from a developer perspective,
which I don't think is necessarily a bad thing.
It's probably useful, but it's just something
you need to be aware and consider in your code,
because otherwise you might have unexpected bugs
or side effects.
And this is the same thing that you need to
worry about anytime you are building an
environment.
It can even be a container.
It can be effectively anything where you're
running code concurrently, where you might end
up with race conditions or issues of that kind.
In the case, for instance, of Node.js,
which is what we used,
what can happen is, for instance, when you have
global state that is shared across execution
environments.
So imagine you have a global variable that you
put outside your handler, and then you reference
that variable inside your handler.
Because you might have multiple instances of
that handler running at the same time
concurrently, if they are both changing that
value, then you might end up with inconsistent
state, where one handler suddenly is seeing the
data that was changed from the previous handler.
Imagine this is like, I don't know,
a user session.
You might have two users that are effectively
overriding each other.
And this is something that might lead to very
serious bugs.
So just be aware of that.
Of course, there are other ways to avoid this
problem.
We're not going to go into detail here on how
you can solve this particular problem,
but just be aware the problem exists.
And there are tons of best practices that you
can find online for your specific language so
that you don't run into kind of trading or
concurrency issues, which you now might have,
depending on your language of choice,
just because you have concurrency.
Eoin: And
Luciano: another similar issue is that if you're using
the tmp folder, that's also a shared thing
between concurrent executions.
So again, the same issue might happen in the
sense that if you are creating a file from an
instance, and then another instance is also
trying to create that file, they might end up
overriding each other.
So just be aware and make sure you select file
names that don't conflict, maybe using UUIDs or
something like that.
Logs can also be problematic in that sense
because they will interleave.
And I suppose this is the reason why structured
JSON logs are enabled by default and you don't
get to change that.
And AWS says they will include a request ID by
default in every JSON line.
So that should make it a little bit easier to
avoid confusion between logs when you're just
looking at the logs.
But you can still see interleaved lines,
so it's up to you to filter by request ID.
There are lots more potential pitfalls,
and it's nice that AWS has put a documentation
page that goes pretty much in detail also,
not just with the problems, but with detailed
solutions.
So we'll just give you a link that you can
find in the show notes if you're curious.
And they are also organized by programming
language.
So probably that removes a lot of the noise,
depending on your language of choice.
You'll be focused on what really matters for
that particular language.
Now, I suppose the last topic and probably one
of the most interesting for most people is,
how much is this going to cost me?
Eoin: Yeah, a big change here really, because one of
the biggest mindset shifts with Lambda managed
instances is that the billing is no longer your
memory times duration default Lambda compute
model.
You're not paying for that dimension at all
anymore, but of course you're paying for the
underlying EC2 instances, which are running in
your account for a duration that you don't
necessarily control to a fine level.
So with managed instances for Lambda,
the official pricing model has three dimensions
running in parallel.
So you still have request charges,
just like with default Lambda.
You pay $0.20 per million requests.
That's simple, familiar.
It's independent from how long each request
runs.
And generally, in any bills I've seen,
tiny negligible component compared to the other
dimensions.
Then you have your EC2 instance charge and now
you're paying the EC2 instance that backs your
capacity providers using standard on-demand EC2
pricing.
The key benefit is that now you can apply EC2
instance savings plans and reserved instances
and any other EC2 discount mechanisms that might
be applicable.
The new thing is just like with ECS and why,
you know, you've got kind of a management fee,
managed instance tax, if you like.
With ECS, that was 12%.
We worked it out.
With Lambda, it's a 15% premium calculated on
the EC2 on-demand price of the instance.
So the important nuance to this is EC2 discounts
apply to the compute portion, not to the
management fee.
You're always paying 15% of the on-demand list
price for the management fee.
And also critically, spot instances are not yet
supported, just like ECS managed instances.
What this all means is that if you've got steady
state high volume workloads, you might have
massive cost savings with LambdaMI,
but you'll have to measure and have a look.
Like you'd really need a consistent load or to
be doing something like we did with the video
processing example, where you're scaling it up
for a certain amount of time, doing a large
volume of batch processing and then scaling it
down.
But you can also do things like
multi-concurrency.
And like you said, Luciano, with the high volume
API, you've also potential for cost savings too.
So your mileage will vary, but high volume
requests, longer running Lambdas really can
benefit here.
And of course, remember that you can leverage
existing savings plans with EC2 and reserved
instances to save even more.
Luciano: Yeah, I guess let's jump to the conclusions.
I think what's important to mention here is that
LambdaMI, it isn't like a new version of Lambda.
It isn't Lambda replacing Lambda or Lambda v2 or
whatever you want to call it.
It's just a different execution model.
So it's like a new option for executing Lambda
code.
So it's still the same Lambda developer
experience and integrations.
It's just the compute, the underlying compute is
something that you get to control.
before it was just happening magically behind
the scenes.
That's why we love to call it serverless.
Now it's a little bit less serverless,
but it's an option and there are benefits and
cases where you might want to use this
particular option.
But I personally, I don't know if I like it
or not.
I think it's a bit sad that makes my
mental model or decision-making process or
decision tree, if you want to call it like that,
a lot more complicated because now there are
more options and more dimensions to think about.
But at the same time, it's also a good thing
because there are definitely cases where
something like this is useful.
So now you have that option without having to
leave the comfort of lambda or without having to
do a massive refactor if you already have a
solution that runs on lambda.
So again, good and bad things, you have more
options to decide on.
But at the same time, those options can be very
useful in certain particular cases.
I still expect those cases are maybe limited.
Maybe it's more enterprises with big workloads,
or maybe cases where you're doing cost
optimizations, or maybe cases where you need a
significant amount of concurrency.
But those cases exist.
So now be aware that this option exists.
So as we said, it shines where you have
state-to-state predictable loads, high
throughput APIs, CPU heavy or long running work,
batch workflows, and so on.
I think it might not be the best use cases
if you are worried about
you might have, for example, fast spikes.
And those spikes can cause you throttling.
So depending on your use case, the more
traditional lambda approach might be better
suited for that.
You have more knobs to tune.
So for instance, you have to think about max
concurrency, utilization targets, instance
shape.
So definitely something else that's worth
considering and adds complexity.
And then the minimum function size is also
something you need to be aware of.
Because if you have
I really like, for instance, to do single
purpose lambda functions.
So sometimes I end up with even hundreds of
small lambda functions.
I think this approach pushes you a little bit
more into the LambdaLith, as we did in our
particular example.
So just be aware that there is nothing
necessarily wrong with it.
It's just something you need to consider.
Eoin: And I'd really like if, sorry to interrupt,
but I would really like if there was an option
here where if it was scaling slowly and maybe
you're getting some throttling because it's
trying to provision a new ECS, or sorry,
EC2 managed instance for you, if then you could
say, well, in the meantime, just use default
Lambda for that function, right?
And handle the scale by using the normal
execution mode, but you can't mix the two with
Lambda MI.
You're either using one or the other,
which is a bit of a shame.
It would be nice to be able to have a
blend.
Luciano: Yeah, maybe we can consider this a feature
request if anyone from AWS is listening,
but I definitely agree with you.
So just to close things off, the bottom line is
that this is a new tool and it might be
a very good tool for the right workloads.
It's not necessarily something we should
consider as an upgrade to Lambda, but yet again,
it's definitely a useful tool and it's worth to
know when to use it and how you can use
it.
I remind you that we have a repositor with an
example, you can find it in the show notes.
So if you have tried it, let us know if
you like it, let us know why.
If you don't like it, also let us know why.
We are always open to talk to you and hear
your opinion and see.
And maybe if you found other use cases that we
didn't think about.
One last thing, thanks to 4theorem for
sponsoring yet another episode of AWS Bites.
4theorem is an AWS partner.
It's a consulting company.
We can help you with your AWS architecture.
We can make sure that your implementation are
simple, scalable, cost sane.
So if you're curious, check out 4theorem.com and
find our case studies and get in touch if you
want to know more.
So thank you very much and we'll see you in
the next episode.
Bye.